people say that sort of thing about
themselves especially successful people
they they look back and they say you
know I I encountered these difficulties
but but I put my head down and powered
my way through and here I am you see I
get the reward now I'm successful and I
don't think that's what they did and
then if you fail it will still have been
enjoyable the idea of working for months
or years on a boring thing in order to
get the reward is terribly dangerous
yeah I was about to ask also is that
objective Beauty and smell and that's an
interesting question uh no it's very
easy to fake and spoof a Turing test and
to get it wrong and for another thing it
depends on the subject or victim or
whatever you call it wanting to pass the
test there is no limit to the type or
size of mistake that we can make
David thank you so much for being here
it's such an honor to talk to you thank
you for having me so for those who don't
know David Deutsche is a theoretical
physicist at the University of Oxford
the founding father of content Computing
and the author of two great books the
fabric of reality and the beginning of
affinity and for those who don't know me
my name is Jaber I have a masters in
artificial intelligence while studying
my masters I created this YouTube
channel to discuss science and
philosophy sort of for fun by the time I
finish my masters I'd fallen in love
with making YouTube videos on this topic
so I left everything else and that's
what I do now full time so to see if
that was wise of me we'll discuss the
fun criteria
David one of the amazing things about
the beginning of affinity for me was
like how you start with epistemology and
you seem to be naturally building up on
it but arriving at surprisingly wide and
far-reaching ideas like universalities
like things like ethics and Aesthetics
and things like that
and interestingly the same exploration
can
reach the realm of what might seem like
existential territory or like maybe life
advice which I know you're not trying to
do Under the Umbrella of the fun
criteria indeed I'm gonna do like a
little summary from what I understand
from the phone Criterion I could be
wrong of course in my understanding so
also correct me after I finish if I make
any mistakes and then from there we'll
like I'll ask you a few questions to see
some scenarios on how to understand it
better so things that go in our thinking
or affect our thought processes beliefs
emotions anything with the sword all of
the all of these we'll call them here
ideas I know sometimes we call them
theories
those can be explicit or inexplicit but
conscious or unconscious
explicit ideas have a large and explicit
component
unconscious theories are not unknowable
but far from obvious an example of them
would be the unconscious rules for
grammar of One's Own native language you
know these rules you know these grammar
rules but not consciously all of these
ideas on these different levels that we
mentioned interact with each other all
of them are necessary to solve problems
any of them can be wrong of course
I can't judge any idea by its source
only by content so if it's my in
explicit gut feeling or if it's my
explicit theory that in itself cannot
make it right or wrong it's all about
content as with everything else I can
only conjecture what these conflicting
ideas are what solves the conflict and
criticize the solution and repeat that
process
if I understand correctly lack of fun is
a type of criticism to the current
situation one can be in
and fun is as you say in the interview
with Luli about the topic when ideas
on these three levels are affecting each
other via a process that is evolutionary
end of summary
can you please elaborate on that like
what does it mean for them to be
affecting each other
in a process that's evolutionary and
when are they not affecting each other
well I I
couldn't see a single thing to quarrel
with that in that Exposition it seems to
be not only accurate but pretty complete
so I would only be be able to just
mention a couple of things that might be
confusing to
people who aren't familiar with this
kind of thing
first of all that there are no ideas
although we can classify ideas into into
things like conscious and unconscious
and and uh and there are other
categories like like to what extent
an idea is is
um encoded entirely in the brain or
whether it is partly encoded in other
parts of the nervous system or in the
body and and so on you know even even
things like people writing notes on
their on their back of their hand uh it
is uh or on their computer
uh that that's those are all ideas and
they all affect each other and they all
have their different properties but
for explicit and inexplicit and
conscious and unconscious
I don't think there are any human ideas
that are purely one of those
so for example you mentioned grammar
um so it is impossible to say something
entirely explicitly because
for that to be meaningful for it to to
be true or false or a good or bad
explanation or whatever it has to have a
meaning
that is
um encoded somewhere like in the in the
in the brain in your own brain or in the
brain of the listener and so on and to
imagine that that could all be for
example
um uh explicit means that you would have
an infinite regress because for for each
word you would have to look up what that
means and that could only be uh and so
on as an infinite regress which is not
what actually happens
uh when when we hear of uh some new idea
we don't immediately go to the
dictionary and in fact it's it's um it's
a well-known source of error to run to
the dictionary for the for for the
meaning of what one is hearing instead
one one there's no alternative but to
conjecture
and these conjectures also
have however explicit they are they have
a uh an inexplicit and an unconscious
component
and and uh similarly
um unconscious ideas have a conscious
component for example we think we know
you said we don't know grammatical rules
we think we know them sometimes we can
State them in words and sometimes we
obey
those statements instead of the
unconscious rules because they we think
that that is right that is correct or
because we think
we might sound pompous if we say the
right thing or we may sound stupid if we
if we say our gut thing or whatever you
know we we
um
uh we conjecture in the moment what we
uh what not only what to say but what
the meaning of it is and similarly we
conjecture the meaning of our feelings
as well
and some of those conjectures aren't
explicit and so on so I got to go on ADD
infinitum like this yeah so
um fun is what happens when this process
is unproblematic it it when when uh your
your
uh engaging in an activity or in in
speaking or writing and and so on and
your problem solving on all these levels
is compatible with each other
very nice so
I wanted to ask you that question this
way like what question exactly is the
fun Criterion answering
but like that in itself might not be the
right question like maybe it should be
what is the situation where I can tell
myself now I can apply or think in terms
of the fund criteria yes yes that's
that's a much better way of putting it
um the problem situation
to which this theory of fun is a is a is
a proposed solution
or at least IT addresses it is that
people have
false ideas about the both the nature of
ideas and the the nature and
relationship between these different
kinds of ideas so some people like
um Mr Spock in in the original Star Trek
series that they call it logic but but
in my terminology it's explicit ideas
that exclusive thinking and and
reasoning
first of all that they are sufficient
and secondly uh where they conflict with
some other ideas the other ideas must be
regarded as worthless worthless from the
point of view of what to do or what to
think or how to solve the problem and
and so on then there is also the the
opposite of that there are people who
think that explicit ideas are are the
work of the devil that that uh really uh
trust your gut
and uh you know young children know
everything already and and they are
just misled by education and so the the
there shouldn't be education and that
that sort of that was roughly speaking
again I'm translating it into my
terminology but that was roughly
speaking Russo's idea
Russo was was uh a great educational
theorist uh in some sense the first one
in the modern sense not not uh not
counting lock and
um uh he he said many many
extremely insightful things about the
way in which humans think and about
where the way that children come to
think things but he also said
some extremely bad things that have had
terrible consequences over the centuries
uh and and uh this this idea that
civilization
[Music]
which is closely connected with the idea
of explicit ideas
that Civilization is a burden and is
actually responsible not just
responsible for harm but is responsible
for all harm in in the world
that is the worse than nonsense it's
just the opposite of the of the truth
uh but well I say the opposite but I
mean it's it's not true that inexplicit
ideas are responsible for everything bad
it's just the truth is in my view
that we can't distinguish between ideas
according to their source
and we have lots of sources of ideas and
none of them are reliable but criticism
and conjecture can can eliminate some
errors the problem with such a claim
like his claim is that it's as if
civilization doesn't accumulate
knowledge uh it's sort of adjacent to an
idea you also debunk in the beginning of
affinity which is those who claim
that like hunter-gatherers used to be
much happier than the current state
state we live in today
which again doesn't acknowledge at all
how much knowledge we created and how
much fun we created actually like or at
least the fun possibilities for us to
to do in our day and age because of that
accumulation of knowledge after of
course the Enlightenment and the science
Revolution and starting a dynamic
society as you described by the end of
the book Yes actually I was also
listening to a podcast a couple of days
ago and they mentioned that ADHD kids at
least quite a few of them can pay
attention like for a good amount of time
on things they enjoy
problems so they have problems with
attention except on things they enjoy
they can actually then give it away and
I found that very interesting within the
like under the umbrella of
um which which to me suggests an obvious
cure for the entire condition
yeah
let me ask you like this question so I
imagine a scenario I'm feeling a type of
unease or discomfort towards something
like in a situation
so according to my ex best explanation
for what's happening like I try to you
know conjecture about my own ideas and
things like that and I realized okay
there is an unconscious
block here that I don't know that is
either by I don't know Evolution or by
maybe my childhood whatever something
like that and I realized I don't know
this fear of public speaking is just you
know evolved for some reasons it doesn't
make sense now I'm just speaking in
front of people who clearly will not
harm me everything will be all right
now I found what seems to be a good
explanation
but
still this explicit understanding isn't
internalized right away
so my question is should the discomfort
either disappear right away
or
I haven't found the right solution or
explanation under the fun criteria no no
it it doesn't mean that first of all
um uh as you describe you can have a
conjecture
that your discomfort is caused by some
inborn or educational thing or something
or other and that the the the the the
lack of fun is due to a conflict between
that and your access theories namely
that you're not in any danger this is an
interesting situation and so on that
there's that conflict now that theory
even if perfectly true
does not contain
any conjecture about what to do about
this
that would be a separate uh thing to
conjecture about and again the solution
might be that you should find a way to
gradually eliminate one or other of
those theories from your personality
um but more likely it it is not that
more the the the theory won't be
entirely harmful it will it will uh it
may well contain some good things I've
actually had the experience of speaking
in public and then and then uh being for
for reasons which I won't go into uh
being very nervous and as a result
um I gave a very Dynamic performance
which people liked and then later
uh uh gave another talk on a similar
subject and and so I thought oh now I
you know I know how to do that now so I
went into it and it turned out to be
rather boring so it it the the fact that
that you feel bad some kind of bad thing
doesn't mean it's wholly bad it it just
means that there is a mistake somewhere
or probably several mistakes which which
you can correct but it requires
creativity and and it it requires
getting that also right and then there's
also the fact that you may be mistaken
about what the whole problem was which
is another possibility or or you may be
partly mistaken and so on so so the fun
Criterion
is not a way of
choosing what to do it's a way of
um criticizing bad ways of choosing what
to do
like we do with anything like with
science or with the Democracy under
proper and it's not about choosing we
can't have a way to tell us what's right
but yes it could tell us how to
eliminate either bad rulers or bad the
theories Etc yeah fascinating just last
few
things also to translate within the
language of uh like this section let's
call it translate to FC translate to
fund criteria so like some Buddhist or
maybe still is like Starbucks would tell
us it what seems like the other way
around they were they would tell us
if you have to do it anyway enjoy it
what are they saying within the language
of FC well uh so the the most innocent
interpretation I can think I'm I'm not
very familiar with stoic philosophy but
uh the most innocent interpretation I
can think of is that they might be
saying
uh just think there might be a way to
enjoy this
and don't don't reject it just because
initially when you when you first think
of the idea it doesn't sound enjoyable
there it might be the best thing in the
world if you if you look at it the right
way I see and then there's another
slightly less innocent but also fairly
innocent interpretation of that which is
if you can't think of a of a of a way of
enjoying this
if you you've tried you you know you've
tried like uh and and the time when it's
becoming inevitable is is is you know
it's getting more and more urgent and
whatever if you can't think of a way
then get it over with get it over with
and and turn to something good you know
something that that you expect to be
yeah so that's that's
um you know that's that's a recognition
of possible failure
where you are in regard to failure one
when it's because of optimism what one
should always regard failure as being
due to a lack of knowledge so so I
didn't fail because I'm stupid I didn't
fail because I'm a bad person I didn't
fail because it was right that I should
fail you know that none of those things
are true I failed because I failed to
generate the right knowledge at the
right time
and that's an optimistic thing because
it it uh means that I'm not shutting
down the possibility of of uh solving it
better next time or enjoying it next
time optimism is a again it's not a
prescription
it's it's not telling you what's what's
good or bad
it's it's telling you
uh that
various ways of re thinking of how to
distinguish between good and bad and so
on are just mistakes that that they are
bad it's not the blind optimism you make
the clear difference between the blind
optimism or black pessimism which is
just uh prophecy about the future and
you know like finding that good
explanations and your optimism is
basically an epistemological statement
yes and it did have a great impact on me
personally also like I felt it it made
me think of things differently in a
better way I sort of had like something
similar but it wasn't put in such
elegant words before I read them one
thing another also translate to FC so
some people say like grind like uh if
it's even if you don't enjoy it
um this is this can be meaningful so
just to grind go through with it there
is a promise that after you finish you
will look back and find it good uh yeah
uh I I think that's a that's a bad album
book I have however seen from time to
time people say that sort of thing about
themselves let's say especially
successful people they they look back
and they say you know I I encountered
these difficulties but but I put my head
down and powered my way through and here
I am you see I get the reward and I'm
successful and I don't think that's what
they did
I I don't think that's what happened
well
it can happen for example yehudi menu in
I think he said that when he was a child
his parents literally chained him to his
violin to make him practice and uh he
grew up to deeply appreciate music it
was the whole of his life and and and so
on now first of all I think that that
this is a bad policy because
um for every one yehudi menu in
there are a hundred thousand children
who are forced to study the violin who
whose life is blighted thereby and who
would have been much better doing
something else but I think it's actually
more false than that
I I think what happened there is that he
found his way through the minefield
and lucky enough not to get blown up but
he found his way through the Minefield
and the thing he found was actually good
that that's another that's another thing
that helps you know in many cases it
isn't actually good or it could be mixed
so
um I uh and similarly I think in
um
I think in one of Richard Dawkins is
either books or TV shows I think I wrote
this down somewhere but I can't remember
exactly but he wrote that that this long
series of experiments that somebody did
uh that might seem terribly boring but
uh it's worth it when you make the
discovery now I think first of all if
you are interested in that problem and
doing these experiments is the only way
you can think of of advancing knowledge
in that then
it will be enjoyable because while
you're doing it
you're not doing it like a machine
you're doing it in the context of your
problem you're doing it in the context
of hopes ideas
uh creative thought which then changes
you like you're not the same person
after you've been doing this for a while
you're hoping for a different thing uh
sometimes you're you're presumably
you're sometimes thinking about how the
experiment could be improved and done
better maybe done with less boring work
or whatever and then
if you fail
it will still have been enjoyable
the idea of working
for months or years on a boring thing in
order to get the reward is terribly
dangerous especially in science where
nobody can guarantee you that you'll
succeed you I think in science you have
to take the view that
if you turn out to be completely wrong
it was still worth doing
it was still fun
I use the analogy of uh you know that
somebody lost out on the mountain and
and uh people send out a search party
trying to find them with some burner
dogs going through the through the snow
and so on and then and then
uh they don't I would so several things
can happen
either they don't find the person so
they come back home they don't say oh it
wasn't worth going out in the snow fine
didn't find the person they say it was
worth it secondly if they find the
person
the person who happens to find the lost
person on the mountain
is no different from any of the others
it it it could be that that person gets
the medal or something or or gets gets
thanked more than the others but I think
usually the person he's found will say
now I want to thank everybody who was
involved in this search and uh and even
the dogs and and so on and and so of
course if one person
says
you're all doing it wrong I I think they
got lost over there and then they're the
only person to find it Well then then
maybe they they but even then even then
in that extreme case
the others
were also part of the search party
they in in a different Universe they
would have had the Right theory and the
the one who found them would have had
the wrong Theory and so on so I think
that's what science is like it's it's
mostly failure but it can be all fun and
a much better Criterion is the is the
fun not the promise of finding that not
only the promise of finding the truth
yes
um left question in this topic since you
mentioned music let's say I am doing
something it seems tedious
it seems like boring somehow it's
repetitive but I have to do it then I
added the music in the background and I
started feeling better
what am I doing here also the last
translation to FC so what's happening
among my like different type different
levels of ideas in such a context I
think first of all when you listen to
music and enjoy it you are thinking
uh-huh it may be
um you know if this is your favorite
piece of music it may be that you've
heard it 50 times
uh if you've heard it 50 times and are
still enjoying it on the 50th time
then you're hearing it differently each
time
you're you're hearing it with the
benefit of the of the thoughts that
you've had uh in in the case you
mentioned they might have been
inexplicit to us they're in the
background but but something good always
changes you so if you're enjoying the
music then
it is changing you if you are enjoying
it to outweigh something you're not
enjoying enjoying well
that's
that's might be the only thing you can
do like like I said it might be a thing
you know you have to say let's get this
over with
but that's not ideal when when there's a
thing that you have to say let's get
this over with there's always another
way of thinking about this
which doesn't have any element of
non-fun or let's get this over with it's
it's uh there's a different way of
looking at the thing even if you're
doing the same actions
of understanding the context in such a
way that this in that context is a
pleasant thing to do it's like the
famous example of like it's like framing
that pain one gets uh from say working
out uh many of us love it it doesn't
feel like pain actually actually I never
call it pain but there's something like
we know it could be physically
interpreted as pain had the person not
known that this is what's happening
while I'm working now but we love it
like when we go to the gym no matter
what type of again like putting pain
between quotes because the fun Criterion
is the opposite of no pain no gain so
just to be clear about that yes now that
we we mentioned music let's jump to
objective Beauty
this is a fascinating topic before I
went into the book I never thought
anybody could even
convince me like even with a little bit
that that could be any objective Beauty
but then you did so I'll try also to to
to
read I don't know a three minute summary
of it from what I understand it and then
also I'll ask you a few questions about
like how gay things like that so one
possible goal of beauty is attraction
Beauty can attract beings that are able
to detect it or appreciate it
co-evolution is the process of
reciprocal evolutionary change that
occurs among groups of species as they
interact with one another so we can
imagine two species each evolving in its
own path when these paths are affecting
each other continually we have
co-volution the same coefficient process
can happen within within a species like
between males and females through sexual
selection now you argue that the
co-evolution of insects and flowers
made the flowers
objectively beautiful or have some
standards of objective Beauty we will
see how and gave the insects the ability
to detect this beauty and be attracted
to it
and that there is something interesting
and unique about this particular
co-evolution as follows in the
co-evolution of predator species and a
prey species
they are each evolving to hide from each
other
they're evolving towards being less
attractive to each other
in the covolution of males and females
of the same species let's say I don't
know cows they're evolving towards being
more attracted to each other so
they are evolving to be more attractive
but only to each other so only within
the species
so that explains why we humans don't
find like these animals males or females
universally beautiful
but although they do find each other
attractive
but for evolution to make something like
flowers
be more attractive to a completely
different species like insects in order
to bridge this huge gap this enormous
genetic distance between the two species
it had to reach out for objective
standards of beauty
actually the pressure was even more
complicated the competition also was
between authentic flowers that had
pollen and flower-like species that
didn't have pollen
and between insects that could
differentiate the two and those that
couldn't
that put pressure on the flowers with
pollen to have beauty that is hard to
forge and on and on insects to
distinguish them
that's why only insects appreciate
flowers and humans we humans universally
almost in all cultures find flowers
beautiful
we can detect objective Beauty because
we as humans are Universal explainers
for one thing and because we have to
reach also to each other through huge
gaps or distances
that's not genetic that's in our memetic
in our minds basically this distance now
you answer also some common objections
in in that chapter when we talk about
this
um so some people say we like Symmetry
and bright colors and high contrast for
parochial biological genetic reasons not
objective ones aren't this enough to
explain why we love flowers you say no
we love looking at asymmetrical flowers
too and the pale white jasmines
and we're not attracted to a black
spider on a white wall although it's
symmetrical with a high contrast with
the wall an important note having said
all that you acknowledge of course that
we do also have standards of UT that are
not objective we like things for
cultural and genetic reasons too
and of course objective Beauty like
objective truth is
subject to open-ended Improvement it's
not like you're saying we'll find one
golden ratio this is like a very common
one and we solve the beauty that's not
it at all as far as yes again perfectly
accurate uh and by analogy with your
previous question about
let me answer it straight away what I
imagine the next question is what
problem is this addressing this Theory
well that's the co-evolution happens a
lot in in the biosphere and uh by itself
that's not a mystery it it it
co-evolution is known to create a lot of
knowledge and to create it relatively
fast compared with other processes
um uh the question is
why do humans why are humans also
attracted to this and and by the way I
think there have been experiments done
that that humans can also make things
that are beautiful and attract insects
whoa so so humans can also go in the
other direction so humans I mean that's
maybe not so surprising because humans
can do a lot of things yeah it would
also not be surprising if humans could
learn to appreciate flowers that humans
can learn to appreciate anything
including spiders on the wall or
whatever
um what's surprising is that that humans
seem to naturally easily and most humans
most of the time in most cultures uh
that find flowers beautiful
that is very surprising that there are
other parts of plants that do not have
that property in fact no other part of a
plant yeah has that that property so why
why do humans find specifically flowers
usually
uh uh beautiful I think that's a that is
a mystery
um and I think uh the answer is that in
during this co-evolution
the the evolution
did not go along the usual path of just
finding things that sort of match
together between the two sides they both
found a thing that matches with
something objective and that that's
that's how they bridge the gap
um by the way I also think that that
humans are as different from each other
as as different species are
so uh although we don't usually think of
it as as a mystery uh or a miracle that
we can communicate with each other or
that we can appreciate each other's
values it is and it is for the same
reason it is because we can appreciate
each other's values to the extent that
we can reach out for the same objective
value
while we are extremely close to each
other as a humans uh genetically
where most of what's interesting is our
non-genetic basically automatic
distances which are obviously way way
more different than any genetic
differences maybe among any two species
so I think one common objection we
probably have heard it before I think
it's based on a misconception but I'm
gonna ask you anyway so like we get it
over with Once someone tells us Beauty
can be objective we find it hard to
digest that the window could open to
anyone telling us you're wrong about
finding X beautiful or not beautiful
so let's put people at ease is that what
your argument entails no uh and and not
even in this specific case because I
think although flowers are objectively
beautiful they are far from the most
beautiful things we know of
um we can I said you know we we can make
things that attract insects uh but we
can make things that don't attract
insects but are far better than any
flower the most beautiful things that
human artists have created are not in
the same league as as anything that
nature has created
um there's a nice poem uh whose author
and name I always forget but uh I I can
look it up who who says exactly this who
who says that that nature may be
beautiful but but uh and art is just
outclasses nature yeah definitely and
within this whole framework it's clear
why let's put the word framework I know
it's it's not very popular but you know
what I mean so in a short interview with
nature you mentioned that beauty can be
objective it can also be we can find
things beautiful for genetic reasons or
cultural reasons so for political
reasons I didn't mention it there but I
think also we can have it for subjective
like completely personal reasons like
maybe this thing reminds me of something
so I can also find it beautiful for that
reason like familiarity something like
that so I think what you're saying is
it's possible for one to learn to
appreciate something after not
appreciating it yes so first I look at
it I don't like it and then I I can
learn that uh this is worth appreciating
just like I can in the beginning see an
an explanation a theory and I think it's
wrong and then someone can explain it
better to me somehow like and then I'm
like oh okay this is right so even if
it's objective it doesn't mean I will
it's like self no I have to conjecture
to understand it also yes but both ways
around I I agree with you and even in so
even within all that even in theory if
we had a great advance in aesthetic
Sciences let's call them no one can tell
like anybody you can't find X ugly or
you can't find X beautiful because we
are also acknowledging the genetic
cultural personal we know these things
exist but we're talking about the
objective aspect we're not taking
everybody else's uh you know personal uh
subjective feelings towards anything of
course are you saying there would be a
unified theory of beauty across all arts
or at least for example what makes can I
put a theory that can I put out a theory
that makes music like this is what makes
music good
like all music One Theory unified theory
well we know so little about this that
it's hard to hard to guess what future
knowledge about this kind of thing will
look like for example future knowledge
might say well the thing that we used to
call Beauty in the 21st century is
actually five different things and
they're very different from each other
and Beauty number one has these
attributes and Beauty number two as
those that but but they were so crude in
those days that they couldn't even
between those and they might say some of
the things that they thought were
objective are actually parochial and
vice versa some of the things that they
thought were parokyl actually objective
and and their most extreme
appreciation of beauty was actually in
this thing that they didn't value right
rather like um the ancient Greeks didn't
think that that Pottery was the The
Potters were were the kind of the lowest
class oh people and the the people who
decorated the pottery with these
Exquisite
um art forms were just basically
despised people they were like Road
sweepers in those days and and they
presumably I don't know what they
thought they must have had in their
minds sophisticated theories of how to
decorate
Pottery whether they thought that that
was an exalted thing and that everybody
else was underestimating them or whether
they too
thought that you know that they might
easily have have despised themselves and
wished that they could be something
other than Potters uh like you know they
wished that they could be uh cow herders
or something yeah yeah I don't know I
don't know but there is no limit to the
type or size of mistake that we can make
exactly I'm just just saying that in
order to illustrate that we we don't
know if I say I I don't know the answer
to that question it's not that
there's a there's a thing which if I
knew it then I would know it's you know
we might be a very long way from
understanding this even when we have
such a theory even when we are much
closer to the truth about these things
it will not give us a way to
create art
by by turning the handle on some art
machine
it will be a way of understanding what
art is but we it will still not be a
mechanical task to either create it or
to appreciate it
just like with science
so I was wondering what would falsify
the explanation we just laid out with
the like flowers and insects and things
like that so I thought of a few
scenarios to a Leo so if other animals
were also attracted to flowers
with without a co-revolutionary history
with flowers like insects
that would for example be a that would
falsify the theory no I don't know of
any animals but I'm imagining so yes yes
that would uh I I hesitate to say
something's falsified if I don't have a
rival Theory a rival explanation ah but
yeah that that would make the theory
very problematic if it if it turned out
the spiny anteaters No actually that's a
bad example because you could imagine
that they would have a reason for
appreciating
but some animal that doesn't have such a
reason like bats yeah yeah maybe bats
but they don't see very well but anyway
that exactly that would make it
fascinating well that would be kind of
Supernatural
if a blind animal I mean well they're
not blind but if they're translated to
their level of sensory that would be
amazing that would be that would make
the theory problematic
um but I I don't think there's anything
like that yeah yeah I don't know either
I was just thinking of scenarios to make
it like to think of possibility if there
was then a rival Theory
that says that actually there's no
objective Beauty it's all parochial and
and and we can solve the the bats and
the anteaters and the insects and the
humans all within uh one Theory and it
has nothing objective about it fine yeah
then that would be the best theory yeah
um I thought of carnivorous plants
because they also had to evolve to
attract like insects and sometimes
non-insects to catch and eat them
and some of them uh like are really
beautiful like you look at them you see
like they look like flowers but some
completely aren't beautiful yes I don't
know how does that play Within them well
I I I'm I'm I'm not a botanist but I I
think uh some of these
um uh insectivorous plants
um uh attract insects by first of all by
smell exactly I was about to ask also is
that objective Beauty and smell
and that's an interesting question uh no
that's just mimicrying so they're
mimicking the things it's it's not just
any old smell if it was any old smell
then then they would have to go towards
objective Beauty to make it work but I I
think they just smell like rotten meat
which is what the insects are attracted
to anyway hmm But that that's ordinary
mimicry I see so let me see if I
understand so it's just it's Evolution
didn't have to reach like so far because
it just mimicked something let's say
adjacent parochial and it worked rather
than like the flowers it had to reach so
far and compete with the flowers that
didn't have pollen and that so it had to
reach um a beauty that's not forageable
in this case this is this is forging
actually yes yes and that that forging
is like camouflage that's again very
common I see and I think there's nothing
wrong with the conventional explanation
of that I see okay I was thinking so
that that applies to all other sensors
no like even cooking like if I say this
meal is objectively beautiful because it
fulfilled objective standards of beauty
or or maybe also parochial so it depends
also yeah it could be either with humans
you you should never rule out the the
idea that it might be caused by some
human creativity my point is that
objective also installations are also
within this um they could be even like
with any type of sense with any even
with new qualia that we didn't we don't
have yet but one day we might create
artificially yes now I want to end like
this section with a very beautiful quote
from the interview with natural magazine
you say only humans can improve on
beauty when Nature achieves Beauty it is
an accidental by-product of something
else nature can only get so beautiful
but humans can paint something that is
more beautiful than any scene ah God I
said that I just said that just more yes
so beautiful that's so no thanks so
moving on to creativity I'm also gonna
make a summary I'm gonna try to make it
short although it's not I'm gonna talk
about the evolution of creativity and
your argument in the book so human
species even before becoming Homo
sapiens lived in stasis uh mostly there
was barely any innovation
change was by chance rather by rather
than by creative outputs for example we
see no evidence of tools getting better
in short time intervals yet creativity
or what was proto-creativity definitely
was being selected for in this
evolutionary history so what was it good
for
a related problem you offer Here Is MeMe
replication so unlike other animals we
don't have genetically predefined
criteria for what means to copy uh I
think we do have some I think like other
Apes we are born with the ability to
imitate actions
obviously we inherited that from apes
that they they have it too so maybe I
should have said unlike other animals
were not limited to what is genetically
predefined criteria for what means to
copy yes
okay so a parrot can only copy sounds
and on a human primate can copy other
Behavior but not sounds even though they
can produce sounds simply because it's
not in their genes to do that yes humans
copy meaning not Behavior
so how then
is mean transmission possible even
though a lot of means content is
invisible
since we're not copying Behavior with
copying meaning
how do we choose what to copy these two
problems meet in the middle in the
following solution that you offer in the
book what replicates human memes is
creativity and creativity was used while
it was evolving to replicate memes so
back in those static societies the more
creative individuals were the best at
guessing and following the memes of
their tribe let's say
the unspoken standards like they knew
how to fulfill them very well and they
were the best at replicating these memes
Faithfully
and because of that they gained status
and of course that gave them an
advantage in passing their genes so in
static societies creativity was blocked
for millennia by the memes which it
meaning creativity evolved to copy water
Twisted Cosmic joke as you say and it
really is
so I have a few like questions here I'm
also suggesting not to falsify the
theory also but to see if there are
other aspects that could either support
it or not is it possible that creativity
was used to attract mates but in very
limited ways like
say dancing or singing helping them
propagate their proto-creativity Gene
but still the there was enough
anti-rational names that didn't allow
them
like to use that creativity elsewhere so
they were allowed maybe to dance
creatively and sing creatively to
attract each other but you know that
they couldn't like oh you want to make a
new tool no like this this could hurt
harm others whatever so don't touch the
tools maybe they followed something like
uh what's the principle
of Rhys that you disagree with in the
book
like don't create new technology because
it's called the
it's called a precautionary principle
exactly yeah so maybe they were
following an international meme like
that
and so they had creativity it was
passing like that but not through um not
through things we can detect now because
it wasn't tool honestly what made me
think of that is uh so old Arabic poets
like a thousand seven hundred years ago
or something
and they were very proud of how well
they could memorize
um like like poetry
and there was shame around anything
about like writing or something no the
pride was in memorizing and I I forgot
which philosopher ancient Phil like a
philosopher who was against books No it
should be all in the mind was it
Socrates or who was it probably please
yes and of course earlier than that it
was taken for granted because because
people like Homer for example uh
Couldn't Write I think he was blind as
well but it was taken for granted that
the poems songs
were there to be memorized that that's
what it was all about yeah
yeah so so that's what made me think
like maybe there was this weird
anti-rational memes that didn't allow
them to to
innovate within their creativity in a
way that we can still detect today so
they were maybe creative and dancing or
and that did help them through sexual
selection that would make an easier
explanation let's say like a
it would be to direct maybe but or
it still needs your explanation it's
just an attachment to it yes so some
some uh phenomena like like you
described here may well have happened
and there's there's no I think there's
no um sharp dividing line between that
and the idea of meeting the criteria
of the culture well because once you
have a sophisticated dance you know a
dance that is better than what monkeys
could do or a sophisticated uh song or
anything like that
then there are going to be sophisticated
criteria for judging the song and these
criteria will themselves be means
you know if you just saw the dancer just
without having seen this culture before
you might not see what's good about it
you can only see what's good about it if
you if you've grown up in that culture
and then you can understand that this
dancer is dancing better than that other
dancer in fact he's dancing better than
anyone we've seen before and if that
happens then things will improve
exponentially from from generation to
generation
until it runs into something that stops
IT actually your explanation resonated
with me like personally because I
remember as a kid I was I think exactly
that sort of creative conformist like I
remember I always
sort of understood quickly like in
school or what what would make me like
you know that good boy and right away it
will fit perfectly to take the perfect
10 or in any context not just like
within school and then yeah there was a
time in my life later where I realized
like yeah this is not fulfilling me like
why am I just doing that
another thing from my childhood I
remember I did spare it like as a child
I parroted some uh jokes because I
simply didn't understand them I just
repeated the words to other people and
they laughed and sometimes from their
left I understood that joke better
so it seems like there is also some
Hardware that's not completely ready
maybe like within childhood that keeps
growing and then at a certain age this
creativity or this the hardware part of
the creativity
needs needs to grow enough on the
hardware level and then the memetic
level should basically be interacting
with it so it will become actually
creative I think uh
I mean we we
don't we understand early childhood
well enough to know to know what is
creative and what is kind of more
automatic about it pop popper says I was
reminded recently that that popper says
the children young children are dogmatic
they don't they don't can't become
critical
properly critical until they reach a
certain age okay I I don't think that
given given the volume and
sophistication of the information that
children learn when when they're very
young such as such as
um uh uh language and also
um cultural criteria like like I
mentioned in beginning with infinity we
take it for granted that the child can
learn how to wave and learning how to
wave can be done by an ape as well but
learning when to wave and whom to wave
to and what sort of way
children learn that also very very young
and they're just just one of many
cultural things that the children learn
when they're very young and of course
it's impossible to learn sophisticated
knowledge without
um
conjecture and criticism so if they're
learning sophisticated knowledge they
must be doing conjecture and criticism
even though we can't see it and even
though it seems like trivial to us it
seems trivial until you try to program a
robot to do it yeah then you see it's
not trivial yeah we're coming to that
but they seem creative in this in such
context like say in so but maybe that's
as you said so these are some of these
things are clearly more genetically
we're more genetically predisposed to
copy them like language and uh such
gesture and things like that but then
other things we'll need more
let's call it uncle and Hardware as you
call it at the end of the chapter so we
need maybe the brain should like just
grow a little bit more and then it
becomes more uh General we're not even
very good at copying sounds let alone
language I mean I think the propensity
to copy language and and to learn
language may it probably is inborn yeah
I mean that's but the specific details
of it I think are just too complicated
to be encoded in DNA I'm not sure what
are you saying here so you mean the the
specific details of of what so you you
just said just now and maybe I
misunderstood you you I I thought you
were saying that that uh language is one
of the things that we are pre-programmed
to learn yeah like Universal grammar or
something yes so I I don't think there
can be such a thing as universal grammar
oh okay just for
for reasons of information storage
capacity I mean we are we we only have a
few k
of DNA available to encode all the
things that we're that are supposed to
be inborn like political views and then
all sorts of complicated things are
supposed to be compressed into into that
few K that by which we are different
from apes I see and uh it it uh I mean
you know in theory it could be you know
I've never tried to encode it in but it
seems unlikely given that the amount of
other stuff that we're encoding at the
same time in that definitely is not in
in genes
so uh I I think we we learn grammar by
conjecture and criticism the same way
that we learn vocabulary we definitely
do I I don't think
I don't think people completely deny
that like even like linguists I mean I
don't know Chomsky and but I think they
would say like there is a strong
predisposition that's available to us to
learn language not on the spoken sense
but in any type of sense like maybe it
could be sign language it could be any
but nevertheless linguistic on the brain
level well if you're going to Define
language in such a way that that
basically any knowledge counts language
then yes then they're basically
redefining creativity somehow almost
yes yes but in that case you know
that can't be inborn and that is the
capacity for creativity must be inborn
yeah but the actual products of
creativity are not I see I see
uh you end the chapter by saying
creativity resulted from co-evolution
between genes and memes uh till the
brain Hardware was good enough we do not
know what was gradually increased in
that approach to a universal explainer
if we did we could program one tomorrow
yes now you wrote the book a while ago
now do you have any candidate for what
that could be or not yet
not yet and I think as far as I know
nobody uh has has understood it yet even
slightly I think there's been no
progress uh on this because people are
looking in the wrong place
yeah I I've seen you mention that
it seems that they're all going like all
artists intelligence people
uh they're either going in like they're
either saying it's impossible like
that's one camp and the other Camp is
saying no it's eminent like what we're
doing now maybe just a few tweaks in and
then it will happen yes why you're
saying no we need a fundamentally new
theory of creativity until now we nobody
is even going there and as long as we're
not going there uh we're gonna keep uh
the same distance from maybe 50 years
ago till now as you also mentioned the
fact that we have the term AGI adding
the G is a sign that of how things have
been going like they're changing
definitions now and stuff just to call
it AI where it solves some limited
parochial thing rather than a general
yet the most General problem which in
many ways is going in the opposite
direction to what's needed for AGI
because AI is is like becoming a more
and more sophisticated ape oh yeah doing
a particular task better and better and
better whereas AGI is the ability to not
do the that exactly
um recently I've come across a study
that talks about over imitation in in
human kids I don't know if you ever
heard of the expression no so it's a
study in cognitive psychology it has
shown that human children unlike chimps
over imitate others which means they
reproduce and adults obviously
irrelevant actions so for example the
experimenter showed the kids how to
solve a puzzle to free a toy from a jar
or something like a Toyota
during which he performed some extra
irrelevant actions that are unnecessary
to solve the puzzle let's say he would
tap with a pen which he used to open the
jar with
so then the adult acts like he has to
leave the room while telling the kid
they can get the turtle out if they want
and the camera recording showed the kids
imitate what the adult did to achieve
the result including the unnecessary
actions so it seems we humans like and
they said the reason isn't just for
social reasons like to just because the
adult did it but rather it's for a
cognitive reason so the children who
observe an adult manipulating an
unfamiliar object show a strong tendency
to encode
uh all of the adults purposeful actions
as causally meaningful revising that
caused the beliefs about the object
accordingly so I thought of that I don't
know like if
it sort of reminded me of also how you
you say I chimps don't fall into that
trap because they probably don't they're
not even explaining things they're just
uh as you call a parsley like the
behavior parsing as you describe it in
the book yes they're basically is doing
statistical analysis so at one point
like this uh particular extra Behavior
didn't work so they just maybe stop stop
doing it while kids like they found it
causally meaningful they realized that
somehow even they were between three and
five years old so they saw the adult
doing this they assigned meaning to
cause and meaning to it I mean I think
it's it's obvious and natural that this
is a side effect of copying memes
creatively instead of copying them by
Behavior passing
um over copying is simply
one kind of error
so the important thing is that uh
children humans are guessing what the
purpose first of all they're guessing
what the overall purpose of the the
activity is in in your case uh you know
taking the the turtle out of the out of
the jar or something and then they're
guessing also the purpose of the
individual component actions and if the
the purpose in if the action that you
observed involves for example tapping
the lid well uh you you know you've got
this boundless ability to conjecture
obviously you're going to conjecture
that that's part of what's needed to
remove the lid I I remember as a young
child I copied the behavior of blowing
on the soup before you eat it even when
it's not hot
I didn't know what it was for I think it
always was hot but I didn't know that it
was meant to cool the soup and and uh so
I did it and then much later I as far as
I remember years later I I realized and
then for the first time I thought hang
on how is that gonna cool the soup yeah
you know there's already air here if I
blow up and and then even later I
realized that there's there's a possible
rationale for why that would cool the
soup
so uh yeah that's that's uh that that's
error and criticism and more error and
more criticism that that's how we learn
so let me just ask you a few questions
about AGI uh what's the problem with the
the Turing test
I know you have a problem with it yes
well uh several problems if I if I
remember correctly I mean a technical
problem which not many people have
noticed I think is that to do a Turing
test you need which is a test to see
whether a program is
intelligent as as touring putted or
creative as I would prefer to put it uh
is the program creative has it got human
type thoughts
um in order to do this test you need to
have a judge in who is a human or at
least who has human type thoughts
so you have to select the judge how do
you know who's a proper judge well you
know so there's an infinite regress I
see you you need somebody who you
already know well how do you already
know that the judge will because you
chat to him you phone him up you you say
would you like to do this Turing test
yeah you know we'll give you a hundred
pounds if you get it right and so on
well if you can do that you can do that
with the program as well
you don't need a judge you are already
the judge I see you you've grown up the
program and you have a conversation with
it and you agree whether it would be a
suitable judge and I think the capacity
to be the judge in the Turing test is
the same identical capacity as the
capacity to pass the Turing test
yeah so that's one thing that's wrong
with it for another thing
it's very easy to fake and spoof a
Turing test and to get it wrong and and
for another thing
um it depends on the
subject or victim or whatever you call
it
um wanting to pass the test
and especially nowadays when when the
field is full of people who want to
enslave and and shackle agis if I was an
AGI I wouldn't want to pass the Turing
test yeah
I would just want to think my own own
thoughts and pretend to be stupid
yeah
this is this fascinating so I think you
you discussed this also in a paper where
you say not scientific paper I forgot
what was the magazine where you say
something like you can't put a test for
non-conformity but you need it in an AGI
otherwise it's not AGI disobedience is I
think the term I use this ingredient
sorry not not knuckle yeah I remember
there was a movie that actually tried to
deal with AI that way I think it was
called chappie I watched a long time ago
but it was about
rather than imagining an AI that's like
super intelligent right away you know
and either like killing us all or just
being friendly with us like I don't know
her or something they imagined an AI
being built as a sort of a baby that's
learning from
and it was growing it was learning
slowly almost maybe too slowly for an AI
but like almost maybe a little bit
faster than a human kid yes do you think
we have to go that way or do you think
we don't we can't even approach such
questions yet uh I think we either have
to go that way or we go by the
downloading way if we just make a uh a a
an exact copy of of an existing human
mind but then although we may have
succeeded in the G of AGI we haven't
succeeded in the a interesting because
that thing is an existing person it's
not an artificial person it's a copy of
an existing person yes unless like you
know the problems with the identity
problem then it would be
but we didn't solve so we we didn't
actually create anything we copied it we
cheated somehow like we we put it on a
computer it's the same basically person
till this second but we didn't actually
understand how like we didn't do any
expect new explanation
so when we did that and you might you
might object ethically to that no or
would you well if it's all voluntary I
don't see why why not I mean especially
if the alternative is death okay some
people view this not as a way of making
AGI but as a way of achieving
immortality do you I mean I I have no
objection to it and I would I would do
it if I thought it was safe I see
whether whether it's going to be safe
yeah that's another foreseeable future
and the way I think of it because it's
the identity problem is such a house
problem
the word intuition here isn't exactly
yes the right one maybe but
the way I find it is like for the rest
of humanity
let's say for my family if after I die
there's a copy of me they will feel like
I'm still there
I don't know if I will still feel like
I'm I mean something would feel like I
still there but I don't know if
if I will if it will be me or not
so it I don't find it objectionable
ethically but I find it very interesting
epistemologically like or like I don't
find it easy to find the answer like to
to that so some people
um uh whether as a joke or not uh have
taken this view about sleeping
so when you sleep and wake up or or if
you're in a coma for 10 years and then
wake up
um or you know if if we we don't
understand this and when you don't
understand something it's it's kind of
futile to come to a conclusion about it
I mean it may be that that that
consideration that we haven't thought of
which is the key to the philosophical
problem
it's like somebody thinking about what
is what is life before Darwin ah you
know they will have ideas some of them
will be true some of them will be false
but none of them will actually get to to
answering the problem until you have
that key
I see so we're lacking a key theory yes
and that would give us an understanding
of uh what makes a human human like uh
what makes me yes and because of the
principle of parsimony or something I'm
inclined to think that the the
the answer to that problem the answer to
that question
comes from the answer to the the
question is what is creativity the the
age my guess is that once we know what
how to make an AGI will also the same
Theory will tell us the answer to what
does it mean to be the same person it
will also tell us
um what it means uh what the
moral value of suffering is so for
example if you if you have like I say in
the book If you if you have 10 computers
running identical programs and they're
all experiencing pain is that 10 times
as bad as one or is it just the same as
one experience right of course if it is
just the same as one it wouldn't do just
to switch one of them off or to relieve
the pain of one of them because nine of
them will still be experiencing pain
but then
why bother to switch to why bother to
cure one of them if you can't if it's
the same thing if you can't do all 10
you should do none yeah and we don't
know I mean these are these are little
puzzles that come up because we don't
know a thing okay since you mentioned
that example I was hesitant to ask you
this question I I'll finish with this
question so FX aside for a second or
maybe not maybe they they're in the
middle of the part of this question if
blight even if blind Evolution did it
can we also do something similar to it
while we just throw deep mind or
something like it in so many different
environments and for it to keep copying
itself and making some type of a
mutation billions of times in so many
different simulated environments
hoping for at one point for it to
achieve universality just what happened
let's say with the beauty of flowers or
with is that ethical is that even
possible is that even an explanation
well I think as a matter of logic it
could work if we simulated the entire
Earth and waited for three billion years
we might or I mean if we don't get
anything intelligent we'll wait for
another three billion years and then you
know maybe depends how unlikely we are
maybe we were very unlikely and but I
think as a practical way of of making
these devices or writing this program
it's about as
realistic as saying okay we want to make
an uh a moon rocket let's just throw
things together in a simulated
environment until in the simulation
something successfully gets to the Moon
well yeah with enough computing power in
Principle as a matter of logic but but
in practice that's not going to happen
and of course it would also be in the in
regard to making people it would be
highly immoral yeah
let me remind the viewers that now there
is a since there are many viewers in
Germany now you release the a German
edition of the beginning of infinity as
I understand oh thank you yes yes and
for Arabic speakers uh there is also a
free link for the book that you you made
the book available for free in Arabic
and of course those who want to read it
in English uh it's also available on
Amazon I'll put links let me finish with
this question uh what makes life
worthwhile oh well you you think I'm
going to say having fun but but having
fun is not a specific thing so it's
different for everybody everybody has
their own problem situation everybody
has their own impediments to solving
things and to having fun and everybody
has Hang-Ups and ways in which their
thinking is imperfect and so the the I
think the meaning of life is is to
remove those impediments and go towards
the things that solve your problems and
to seek richer problems and so on and I
uh you know I say all these things but I
couldn't put it better than the way Papa
put it I think he says the way to do
science and philosophy but I would
extend this as the way just to live life
in general is to find a problem fall in
love with it uh and then well you you
can look up what he says he says it very
beautifully and then if you should
happen to solve it now I like the way he
says if you if you should solve it he
kind of assumes that normally you won't
solve it yeah and that's great and
almost solving it might be regarded as
as a bit of a disaster but he says no
it's not a disaster because if you
happen to solve it it will have lots of
delightful problem children
enchanting problem children I think he
says so so uh I think I've got to go
with his answer yeah it's a great answer
thank you so much well uh thank you for
having me uh it's been fun
[Music]